---
layout: post
title: "What Goes in to Choosing a New Helicopter?"
date: 2023-03-03 17:18:11 +0000
categories: jekyll update
author: OCdt Lewis McLachlan
background: /img/background.jpg
---

The search for the UK’s New Medium Helicopter is well underway to replace the aging Puma fleet, with the competition narrowed down to 4 designs after responses were submitted to a dynamic prequalification questionnaire (DPQQ) last summer. The results were announced on the 31st of October 2022 that Leonardo, Airbus, Boeing and Lockheed Martin had their proposals approved for the next stage of the procurement process. Let’s take a look at the story so far…

In 1967 the Royal Air Force was in the market for a new helicopter, replacing the Westland Whirlwind HC.Mk 10, in what was then the army support role, and is now regarded as the support helicopter task. Two years earlier across the channel, Sud Aviation (later to merge and become Aérospatiale) had developed a medium lift all-weather capable helicopter for the French Army named the SA 330 Puma. It was performing well in trials and attracted the interest of the RAF and 48 Puma HC Mk 1 were ordered. Part of this order included a significant joint-manufacturing agreement between Aerospatiale and Westland Helicopters of the UK. The close collaboration between the French and British firms would lead to purchases of Aérospatiale Gazelle by the UK and the Westland Lynx by France. Under this agreement, Westland manufactured a range of components and performed the assembly of Pumas ordered by the RAF. Puma entered service with the RAF in 1971 operated by 33 squadron from RAF Odiham. Its first major deployment was to Rhodesia in 1980 and then serving in Northern Ireland, Central America, the Balkans and Iraq, where its service proved to be invaluable. By the time of Operation Herrick in Afghanistan the Puma was nearly a 40-year-old design with its limitations apparent in the heat and altitude of the Afghan mountains. It was decided that 24 airframes should be upgraded to the new HC Mk 2 variant, with the first delivered in 2012 and the work completed in 2014. The Puma HC Mk2 upgrades resulted in a far more powerful and protected helicopter extending the out of service date to the mid-2020s.

The Integrated Review published in 2021 announced Puma would be retired by the middle of this decade. This comes at a challenging time for the RAF, where there are limited funds for lavish new equipment programmes in the shadow of the pandemic and in the midst of a cost-of-living crisis that is further stretching the current government’s budget in all directions. Planning the future of our fleets is as much a political-based question as a capability-based one (more on this later). During times like these it is important to utilise alliances and partner with nations to develop modern capabilities. Collaborative programmes such as the Global Combat Air Programme (Tempest) between Italy, Japan and the UK, demonstrates how multi-national partnerships can help to reduce cost and risk involved in complex equipment programmes. The United States is currently undertaking one such programme to replace the Sikorsky UH-60 Blackhawk, the spine of their helicopter fleet, albeit it won’t be in service until the early 2030s. Named Future Vertical Lift (FVL), it is an enormous project to replace up to 25 aircraft types with 4 or 5 variants from the same family of tilt rotor aircraft. So, what has this got to do with a replacement for Puma? With the UK armed forces looking to become ever more agile and expeditionary in nature, coupled with the return of carrier-based aviation allowing the projection of air power far from established airfields, a tilt rotor aircraft would be ideal for our forces. Realising the future threats that we may face - and by extension the theatres we may find ourselves operating in such as the Indo-Pacific - an aircraft that has the cruise speed of a fixed wing transport but the ability to hover and land vertically would prove to be a valuable asset in such an environment. The Future Long Range Assault Aircraft (FLRAA), a derivative of the FVL programme, fits the criteria for a medium lift capability. It was announced in December 2022 that the Bell V-280 Valor had been selected by the US Department of Defence as the winner of the FLRAA tender but remains a decade away from entering service. The MOD found itself facing a crossroads. There were three options on the table: they could either further extend the OSD of Puma, a platform already reaching obsolescence, gap the capability until FLRAA enters service in the mid-2030s or purchase an interim aircraft ‘off the shelf’ to serve for the next 10-15 years. The latter option was chosen, with the project named New Medium Helicopter (NMH).
A contract worth between £900 million to £1.2 billion was launched by the MOD on the 18th May 2022 for up to 44 aircraft. Included in the package is air & ground crew training, technical support and maintenance for the new fleet. NMH will replace Puma as well as the Bell 412, Bell 212 and Airbus AS365 Dauphin fleets. The aircraft will fulfil the role of troop transport and logistics, medical evacuation, combat search and rescue, and humanitarian operations. Competitors were asked to respond to a DPQQ in summer of last year. This first stage concluded by the end of October with Airbus, Boeing, Leonardo and Lockheed Martin all making it to the next round for an invitation to negotiate (ITN). What are each of these companies offering? Foremost, a medium lift helicopter with training and support packages and secondly, UK-based production and manufacturing sites to varying degrees. The importance of the latter can’t be understated with the current government wanting to show that a post-Brexit Britain can still have a strong indigenous manufacturing base that falls in line with the levelling-up policy.

Airbus have offered their H175M helicopter, which is still under development having been adapted from the H175 commercial design. Airbus say it has a range of approximately 600 nautical miles and cruise speed of 150 knots which is impressive for a helicopter of its size. With space for 16 troops and their equipment as well as the ability to carry an underslung load, it has certainly got a lot going for it. Airbus utilises its ‘Helionix’ avionics package for a full glass cockpit used throughout its helicopter family such as the H135 (Juno) and H145 (Jupiter). The Juno and Jupiter are currently used as training aircraft at RAF Shawbury for all defence helicopter training and the commonality between aircraft would certainly be welcomed by pilots moving on to the OCU. Airbus say they will establish production at their Broughton Facility in North Wales, which currently manufactures wings for all aircraft manufactured by the company and employs around six and a half thousand people. With the aircraft being manufactured for the MOD there are restrictions on where certain components and parts can be imported from. The standard commercial model of the H175 is manufactured in China and this is a serious sticking point in Airbus’s proposal and culminated in 5 years of hard work to remove Chinese produced components from its supply chain. The Airbus proposal utilises several established aerospace companies in its bid such as Martin Baker, Spirit AeroSystems, based in Prestwick and Belfast, Pratt and Whitney Canada as well as Boeing, who will deliver the aircrew, groundcrew and maintenance training. Airbus makes a strong case with a more than capable platform and if national security concerns about its supply chain can be satisfied, a strong industrial strategy to match supporting the aerospace industry across the whole of the UK.

Little is known about Boeing’s current proposal - they haven’t announced formally yet which of its aircraft it will put forward for the contract but it’s highly speculated it will be the MH-139 Grey Wolf. This helicopter currently serves with the United States Air Force guarding their ICBM sites and is adapted from the AW139 commercial design. With space for 15 passengers and all the bells and whistles of a modern helicopter it would provide the capability that the RAF is looking for. When asked about its proposal for NMH Boeing said it “has supported the United Kingdom armed forces for decades and employs hundreds of people across the country in helicopter sustainment, maintenance, and training. We look forward to hearing more from the Ministry of Defence on the next steps in the New Medium Helicopter requirement”. Whether Boeing offers its own helicopter, or its involvement is limited to supporting the Airbus proposal only time will tell.

Leonardo is the leading manufacturer of rotorcraft in the United Kingdom but are in no way being complacent with their bid for the £1 billion contract. They are offering the AW149 which is adapted from the smaller commercial AW139 design. The beefed-up design to increase survivability includes high ballistic tolerance of the blades, airframe and components as well as a fully integrated defensive aids suite and additional armoured protection. The cabin has space for 18 passengers or 12 combat laden troops and the ability to carry a two-and-a-half-ton underslung load. Orders have already been placed by the Polish Army, Egyptian Navy and the Royal Thai Army. The Polish Army have requested to buy 800 AGM-114R2 Hellfire missiles to equip their AW149s, which on top of the ability to mount 7.62mm calibre machine guns to the doors makes for a potent combination. Hellfire is already in British service with Reaper and Apache and could provide additional capability if chosen to be fitted to a potential future British AW149 fleet at low cost. Leonardo’s current production site is located in Italy but will establish a new assembly line at their Yeovil facility in southwest England if selected to succeed Puma. The new assembly line would be created involving a supply chain of over 70 companies from England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. Relocating current production to the UK is a serious statement of intent by the company to show they have a lot to offer in support of domestic design and manufacturing ability of the UK aerospace industry.

The final contender is the only aircraft on the shortlist that is not adapted from a commercial design - Sikorsky (owned by Lockheed Martin) are offering the S-70 Black Hawk. The MOD have previously turned down the option to buy Black Hawks several times, most recently in 2009 favouring the midlife upgrade of Puma instead. There is no question of the capability of Black Hawk as it’s operated by 29 countries and combat proven having amassed north of ten million flight hours and over 5,000 airframes built to date. It would do everything asked of it in the medium lift role and fit like a glove for SOF missions but it remains to be seen if the MOD will say yes this time around. Lockheed have not published any details on potential production and all export models are currently produced in Poland.

The strongest proposals look to come from Leonardo, the long-time heavyweight of UK rotorcraft production and Airbus, a serious challenger to the status-quo domestically. Boeing and Lockheed Martin both have highly capable aircraft on offer but at the moment are a long way off being able to match the social and economic benefits of Airbus and Leonardo’s offers however these two giants of the aerospace world could easily afford to invest in UK-based manufacturing and production lines if they wanted. Whether they see it as a worthwhile enterprise for a 15-year contract with only 44 aircraft for order is another question. The next stage of the procurement process will take place in the coming months with the MOD entering discussions with each potential suiter to finalise details and iron out the creases before selecting a partner. It is sad to see Puma retired, a true workhorse of the RAF but nothing can last forever despite how many upgrades it can undergo. The New Medium Helicopter will be a low risk purchase able to provide a solid capability while supporting the United Kingdom’s aerospace industry over the next decade.
